* Please specify additional aspects of your scientific training if needed (eg. second degree). If your Education has been interrupted, please specify the occupation(s) you have pursued in the interim. (maximum 2000 characters)

Two aspects of my education and scientific training are unusual.

First, I received two separate degrees from the University of New Mexico: a Bachelor of Science in Biochemistry and a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science. My motivation to pursue these divergent degrees came from a more general interest in the science of complex systems. From the perspective of complexity science, there are fundamental similarities between processes that generate biological phenomena and those that, for example, drive social, political, or economic behaviors. This conceptual unification helped me to develop a more holistic understand of the biochemical systems I was studying in the lab. In a practical sense, this early interdisciplinary training also turned out to be unexpectedly valuable. The algorithms I employed to study biological networks in my PhD, for example, were inspired by algorithms that were originally designed to study social networks. My fascination with complex systems also led me to train at the Santa Fe Institute (a world-renowned think-tank for trans-disciplianry science), where I met a collaborator who played a critical role in the most significant paper from my PhD (Brooks et al. 2014).

A second unusual aspect of my scientific training is it's longstanding focus on interdisciplinary research, particularly a fusion of computational and experimental approaches. I have been working on interdisciplinary biological projects since the conclusion of my undergraduate studies. At that time, I spent a year before joining a PhD program developing computational skills by working as an independent researcher in a computer science lab. I took courses in computer science and mathematics, learned to program in two languages, and designed a bioinformatics project to quantify determinants of miRNA specificity. The skills and knowledge I gained during that period have played a defining role in my research, from their influence on PhD training in systems biology up to the currently proposed EIPOD project.
