Characters:5000

## Multiomic fingerprints of wellness in a genetically tractable yeast population

Wellness is a new frontier in personalized medicine. Start-ups have recently emerged to quantify wellness and provide data-driven approaches to its management.  These projects combine DNA sequencing with longitudinal molecular profiling, as well as coaching to improve health and detect anomalies before they manifest disease. From a technical point of view, however, combining genetic information with molecular profiles to predict phenotype remains a significant challenge. Does integration across multiple scales of molecular information allow more sensitive detection of changes in health? Can many weakly predictive genetic markers be combined with real-time molecular profiling to identify personalized molecular intervention points? As an EIPOD fellow I will address these questions by quantifying the relationship between genetic, molecular, and environmental factors in a genetically tractable yeast population for a phenotype related to wellness, aging.

**Aims:**

1. Identify genetic factors that influence aging,
2. Establish experimental and computational approaches to integrate multiple omic measurements at specific stages of aging, and
3. Detect molecular "fingerprints" that report on the aging process and determine how these fingerprints and their underlying genetic factors are modulated by the environment

Yeast is a well established model of aging in eukaryotes. A yeast’s longevity can be quantified as replicative life span (RLS), or the number of daughters produced before irreversible cell cycle arrest. High-throughput platforms have been established to measure RLS by isolating a single mother cell using microscopy and microfluidic devices []. As a first step in my project, I will establish an experimental system to measure RLS in a genetically diverse yeast population generated by the Steinmetz lab.  Each of 140 haploid yeast segregants from a cross between the laboratory strain of S. cerevisiae, S288c, and a pathogenic strain isolated from the lungs of an AIDS patient, YJM789, will be characterized for RLS. A recent study identified SIR2 as a primary regulator of lifespan in yeast [], we will improve their measurements by using more sensitive QTL detection methods, a more finely measured phenotype, and segregants with greater genomic resolution to increase QTL detection sensitivity. In parallel, I will measure molecular "fingerprints" in the segregants at several stages of aging using a technique being developed by another EIPOD in the Steinmetz lab to isolate individuals of a specified age. These fingerprints will include measurements of the epigenome and regulatory DNA by DNase-seq, the transcriptome by RNA-sequencing, the proteome by SP3 MS developed at EMBL, and the metabolome by targeted LC-MS for metabolites of central metabolism. These heterogeneous datasets will be combined and integrated with extensive prior knowledge of biological networks in yeast using a machine learning approach that I will build to identify combinations of molecules that are diagnostic of the aging process in the context of specific genetic backgrounds. Finally, I will determine how the environment conditions genetic contributions to aging by leveraging a documented heat tolerance phenotype of YJM789. I will re-characterize QTLs and molecular fingerprints at elevated growth temperatures to assign an environmental (in)dependence to each of the genotypes and molecular reporters identified above.

The methods will have immediate application with respect to how the molecular profiles should be integrated and interpreted by these companies. As a final component of my project, I would like to partner with a new wellness company called Arivale (a company started by the head of my previous Institute, Lee Hood) to adapt the computational approaches developed in this project to evaluate human wellness. This will be an exciting opportunity

The Steinmetz group at EMBL is an ideal laboratory to host these experiments. The group has pioneered technologies to study yeast genetics. They maintain a fully genotyped collection of yeast segregants and expertise in the sequencing approaches used in this project. The lab also has active collaborating partners who will provide expertise for the proposed proteomics and metabolomics experiments.

The Stegle group at EMBL-EBI will provide computational support for the interdisciplinary components of this project. The Stegle lab has pioneered statistical analysis methods for genome wide association studies (GWAS). Their expertise will be critical to that is able to account for as well as the

I have expertise in systems biology, including both computational and experimental proficiencies. This project will represent a  second major interdisciplinary transition in my career – albeit a transition in scale rather than kind. With this project and , experimental and computational methods across a range of challenging datatypes. The EIPOD fellowship will provide strong support to take on such a large and challenging project.
