* Please write a short essay about your scientific interests. (maximum 2000 characters)

New technologies are opening doors to reveal unexplored worlds of biological function. It remains a challenge, however, to integrate these new findings with extensive prior knowledge to construct comprehensive representations of biological systems. These challenges are magnified when one considers leveraging additional information, such as genetics, to explain the origins of molecular differences observed between individuals. By the end of my PhD it was clear to me that comprehensive understanding of a biological system would require integrating across multiple scales of biological complexity.

While many tools exist to measure biological systems, there are relatively fewer tools to "put the pieces together". My long term scientific goal, therefore, is to develop these methods. My research aims to combine longitudinal molecular monitoring of cells (or people) with prior knowledge (e.g. genotype) to fill in the gaps between genotype and phenotype.

My proposed EIPOD project emerged from an interest in how technologies are reshaping healthcare. I have been fascinated by a new approach to preventative medicine that attempts to quantify and maintain "wellness" by combining longitudinal profiling with genetics.  Here, I saw an opportunity to create a project that would have implications for data integration paradigms within the basic sciences as well as personalized medicine. I have designed a proof-of-principle project to study a phenotype related to wellness (aging) by combining genetics with longitudinal molecular profiling. My hope is that the project will contribute a data integration paradigm for holistic modeling approaches and reveal insights into the process of aging itself.

EIPOD funding will allow me to take on an ambitious project that is a first-step towards my larger career goal. In addition, it will help me establish valuable research collaborations that will help carry this work on in the future.
