Abstract of research plan
(maximum of 1,700 characters, including spaces and punctuation)

Summarize the proposed research project in order to provide a concise but comprehensive overview of the proposed research project.

The scale of measurable phenotypes is increasing dramatically, from molecular readouts to live cell imaging to the quantified self movement in human populations. Unfortunately, our ability to collect data has quickly outpaced our ability to make robust recommendations based on it. A major challenge in systems biology is to leverage heterogeneous molecular information and genetics to identify personalized intervention points that will predictively alter biological processes, such as disease. This project will combine longitudinal multiomic profiling of a genetically diverse population with integrative computational methods to quantify factors that contribute to the lifespan of Baker's yeast. Aging is a complex biological process with both genetic and non-genetic components, some of which are conserved from yeast to humans. I will use multiple recently developed high-throughput technologies to image physical properties related to lifespan and quantify the molecular composition of cells at several stages of aging across two growth conditions in a genetically diverse yeast population. This large collection of longitudinal, heterogeneous data will be integrated using data fusion techniques and combined with genetic information using statistical machine learning methods to identify genetic loci and molecular fingerprints that are diagnostic of aging. The results of this study will have implications for combining diverse phenotypic measurements in the context of monitoring human wellness and disease, where weakly predictive personalized genetic information may have greater diagnostic power when combined with longitudinal measurements. 
